Add arrow scan documentation (#25)
tableau/hyper-db: website/docs/sql/external/formats.md

should be considered experimental. We recommend to not use it in
production workloads yet.
:::

## Apache Arrow Format {#external-format-arrow}

:::warning Experimental Feature
Hyper's support for the Arrow format is still in an early state and
should be considered experimental. We recommend to not use it in
production workloads yet. Set the `experimental_external_format_arrow` [setting](/docs/hyper-api/hyper_process#experimentalsettings)
to `true` to activate it.
:::

> The `FORMAT => 'arrowfile'` or `FORMAT => 'arrowstream'` option enable reading the columnar, binary format [Apache Arrow format](https://arrow.apache.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `FORMAT => 'arrowfile'` or `FORMAT => 'arrowstream'` option enables reading the columnar binary format [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/).
```

> Thus, data stored in Arrow is usually smaller than in text
> format. As data is stored in columnar format, Hyper does not need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As data is stored in a columnar format, Hyper does not need to
```

We provide a 1-to-1 mapping from Arrow types to SQL types (table below) and expect the user
to choose these SQL types exactly. We do not perform any implicit casts.
The `COMPRESSION` option is not supported.

Arrow Type | Hyper Type | Notes
----|----|----
`Bool` | `Bool`
`Int` signed, 8 bit | `SmallInt` |
`Int` signed, 16 bit | `SmallInt` |
`Int` signed, 32 bit | `Integer` |
`Int` signed, 64 bit | `BigInt` |
`Int` unsigned, 8 bit | `SmallInt` |
`Int` unsigned, 16 bit | `Integer` |
`Int` unsigned, 32 bit | `BigInt` |
`Int` unsigned, 64 bit | `Numeric(20,0)` | Not recommended - processing is slower than other Int types.
`FloatingPoint` with any precision | `DOUBLE PRECISION` | Half floats are not supported.
`Decimal(precision, scale)` | `NUMERIC(precision, scale)` | We do not support precision > 38. For better performance, we recommend using precision <= 18.
`Date` | `Date` |
`Time` | `Time` | Hyper does not support nano second precision and truncates it to micro seconds.
`Timestamp` without timezone | `TIMESTAMP` | Hyper does not support nano second precision.
`Timestamp` with timezone | `TIMESTAMPTZ` | Hyper does not support nano second precision.
`UTF8` | `Text`

> Hyper supports version 1.3. The following Arrow features are not supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hyper supports version 1.3 of the Arrow specification. The following Arrow features are not supported:
```

- Data types: Interval, LargeUtf8, Struct, lists, union, map types, Binary, LargeBinary, FixedSizeBinary, Half Float

- Run end or dictionary encoding

- Arrow internal compression, i.e. no LZ4 compression on `RecordBatches` (see `RecordBatch::compression` in the [arrow messages schema](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/main/format/Message.fbs))

- Big Endian Arrow

> - Arrow types with repeated / non unique column names

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- duplicated / non unique column names
```

- Arrow with zero columns

:::note

> If an Arrow file contains columns with unsupported data types, Hyper can still read the other columns in the file, as long as you do not select any unsupported columns. This is not the case for unsupported encodings, e.g. dictionary encodings. Hyper cannot read Arrow files that contain any dictionaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an Arrow file contains columns with unsupported data types, Hyper can still read the other columns in the file, as long as you do not select any unsupported columns.
```

Rather just add "Dictionary compression" to the list of unsupported features

> If an Arrow file contains columns with unsupported data types, Hyper can still read the other columns in the file, as long as you do not select any unsupported columns. This is not the case for unsupported encodings, i.e. Dictionary encodings, we cannot read Arrow files that contain any dictionaries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an Arrow file contains columns with unsupported data types, Hyper can still read the other columns in the file, as long as you do not select any unsupported columns. This is not the case for unsupported encodings, e.g. dictionary encodings. Hyper cannot read Arrow files that contain any dictionaries.
```

:::

:::note

> Hyper parallelizes the processing on the granularity of `RecordBatches`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Hyper parallelizes queries on the granularity of record batches,
```

should be considered experimental. We recommend to not use it in
production workloads yet.
:::

## Apache Arrow Format {#external-format-arrow}

The `FORMAT => 'arrowfile'` or `FORMAT => 'arrowstream'` option, 
a file extension of `.arrow` or `.arrows` enables reading the [Apache Arrow
format](https://arrow.apache.org/), which is a binary columnar format.
Thus, data stored in Arrow is usually smaller than in text
format. As data is stored in columnar format, Hyper does not need to
read the whole file if only a subset of columns is selected but can
instead only read the parts of the file in which selected columns are
stored. This will speed up queries selecting only few columns of a file
having a lot of columns. Opposing to (Parquet)[#external-format-parquet],
we do not support loading partial Arrow files from S3 - if reading a 
subset of all columns from S3, Parquet is the better option.

We support [IPC streaming format](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#ipc-streaming-format)/`.arrows`

> with `FORMAT => 'arrowstream'` and [IPC file format](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#ipc-file-format)

Author: Applied manually.

We provide a 1-to-1 mapping (table below) from Arrow types to SQL types and expect the user
to choose these SQL types exactly. We do not perform any implicit casts.
The `COMPRESSION` option is not supported.

Arrow Type | Hyper Type | Notes
----|----|----
`Bool` | `Bool`
`Int` signed, 8 bit | `SmallInt` |
`Int` signed, 16 bit | `SmallInt` |
`Int` signed, 32 bit | `Integer` |
`Int` signed, 64 bit | `BigInt` |
`Int` unsigned, 8 bit | `SmallInt` |
`Int` unsigned, 16 bit | `Integer` |
`Int` unsigned, 32 bit | `BigInt` |
`Int` unsigned, 64 bit | `Numeric(20,0)` | Not recommended - processing is slower than other Int types.
`FloatingPoint` with any precision | `DOUBLE PRECISION` | Half floats are not supported.
`Decimal(precision, scale)` | `NUMERIC(precision, scale)` | We do not support precision > 38. We recommend using precision <= 18 if possible.
`Date` | `Date` |
`Time` | `Time` | Hyper does not support nano second precision and truncates it to micro seconds.
`Timestamp` without timezone | `TIMESTAMP` | Hyper does not support nano second precision.
`Timestamp` with timezone | `TIMESTAMPTZ` | Hyper does not support nano second precision.
`UTF8` | `Text`

> Hyper supports only version 1.3. However, some data types, encodings and

Author: We do not support earlier versions. I remove the only.

compressions are not supported. The following Arrow features are not supported:

- Interval

- LargeUtf8 type

- Struct, lists, union, map types

- Binary, LargeBinary, FixedSizeBinary

- Half float type

- Run end or dictionary encoding

> - Arrow internal compression is not supported

Reviewer 2: also: dictionaries

Author: I'm not sure what to do here. The upper line states that we do not support `dictionary encoding` (in my mind this includes the fact that we do not read Dictionary Batches). The second line refers to compression like Z4 on any batches. I clarified the second line. Did you expect something else?

Reviewer 2: ah, I missed that we combined both "run end" and "dictionary" encoding into a single line

- Big Endian Arrow files

- Arrow types with repeated column names

> :::note

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::note Experimental Feature
```

Hyper's support for the Arrow format is still in an early state and
should be considered experimental. We recommend to not use it in
production workloads yet. Set the `experimental_external_format_arrow` [setting](/docs/hyper-api/hyper_process#process-settings)
to `true` to activate it.

> :::

Author: Moved to the top, made it a warning, linked setting to the experimental feature settigns section.
